---
layout: narrative
title: "A Clear Instruction on the Lord’s Supper of Christ  (23 February, 1526)"
author: Huldrych Zwingli
translator: Bruce Gordon
digital editor: Serena Strecker
rights: Public Domain
source: insert source
publication-date: 2026
toc:
- Context
- Argument
- Source
- Text
  
---

---

## Context
Zwingli’s *A Clear Instruction* was published in early 1526, less than a year after Zurich formally embraced the Reformation at Easter 1525. It appeared during a period of intense pressure and deepening isolation for Zwingli. He was under attack on multiple fronts: his theological dispute with Luther over the Lord’s Supper was escalating, leading Catholic figures in Zurich were publicly challenging his reforms, and the Anabaptist movement was gaining momentum. 
The adoption of the Reformation in Zurich in 1525 had not led to a mass departure of Catholics from the city. On the contrary, many influential members of Zurich’s old families remained, continuing to exert power and voicing strong opposition. Beyond his close circle, Zwingli had few allies. In the Catholic cantons, his writings were banned and burned, and he was denounced as a heretic. Increasingly isolated, Zurich faced the very real threat of war from the rest of the Swiss Confederation over what was perceived as its apostasy. 1526 was a difficult year for Zwingli as he experienced his first major defeat at the hands of his opponents. In response to the reformation, Swiss Catholics summoned a disputation at Baden (which was in Catholic lands). The hope was for the great Catholic theologian Johann Eck to face the arch-heretic Zwingli. The Zurich reformer prevaricated, havering between taking on the opportunity to face his most influential opponent and the very real fear he might be put to the flames. In the end, he did not attend and the staged event was a great triumph for the Catholics. The future of the Zurich reformation in 1526 was not clear. 
Zwingli composed *A Clear Instruction* in German to reach a broader audience, especially in the Swiss cities and southern Germany, where his views on the Eucharist were finding growing support. This was his first major German-language treatise on the sacrament, an effort to move the theological debate beyond the realm of Latin academic discourse and into the public sphere. He was fighting a two-front war: against the Catholic establishment in Zurich, most notably the canon Joachim von Griüt, and against the Lutheran camp. The text also marks a significant departure from his former admiration for Erasmus, whose influence on Zwingli’s early sacramental theology had been considerable. By explaining his views in the vernacular, Zwingli aimed not only to persuade educated readers but also to instruct clergy in towns and rural parishes, many of whom had little grasp of the new theology.
The work is characteristic of Zwingli’s writing: rooted in specific historical circumstances, it combines elements of sermon, pastoral exhortation, and sharp polemic. Although it served as a public defense of his Eucharistic theology, it played no role in his dispute with Luther. There is no evidence Luther ever read it, and it was never cited in their exchanges, which were conducted exclusively in Latin.

Argument 

Zwingli’s *Ein klare Underrichtung vom Nachtmahl Christi* (1526) presents a thorough and polemical defence of the symbolic understanding of the Lord’s Supper, opposing both the Roman Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation and Martin Luther’s teaching of the real bodily presence of Christ “in, with, and under” the elements. The central claim of Zwingli’s treatise is that Christ’s words, “This is my body,” must be interpreted figuratively: the bread signifies Christ’s body, given once for all on the cross, but is not literally or substantially his body.
Zwingli builds his case through detailed scriptural analysis, philological reasoning, and appeals to early Church Fathers. He argues that Christ’s body, having ascended to heaven, cannot be physically present in the sacrament without violating the doctrine of his exaltation and the integrity of the Apostles’ Creed. He draws a sharp distinction between the sign (bread and wine) and the thing signified (Christ’s sacrificial death), insisting that the sacrament functions as a memorial, not a repetition, of the crucifixion.
The reformer invokes patristic authorities such as Augustine, Ambrose, and Jerome, emphasizing their figurative interpretations of the Eucharist. Zwingli also stresses the ecclesial implications of the sacrament: it is not a metaphysical mystery but a communal act of thanksgiving and unity, in which believers proclaim the Lord’s death and reaffirm their membership in Christ’s body, the Church. He closes with pastoral and polemical urgency, warning readers not to be misled by learned authorities who conceal error under the guise of tradition. He affirms that his teaching upholds both the plain sense of Scripture and the essential truths of the Christian faith. 

Source
Huldreich Zwinglis sämtliche Werke, vol. 4 (Leipzig: Heinsius, 1927) (Corpus Reformatorum 91)


